In this video I'm going to talk to you about scientific notation.
I will introduce the concept and explain why scientific notation is important.
And you'll also get to see how to print and decode scientific notation in python.
This will also help you better understand how to print information in python in strings.
Now I've already introduced this concept of scientific notation several times in this course.
In particular it was related to discussions of numbers that you expected to be zero but they ended up
being some weird looking number that was like some a bunch of numbers.
And then there was an E minus 15 after it or something.
So if that still seems confusing then it now is the opportunity to shed some light on that bizarre looking
number with the E and the and the minus 15.
Okay so here is where we kind of start from scientific notation.
It starts from orders of magnitude and the idea of orders of magnitude is to just give us an approximation
of the size of a number so we can say ten thousand and twenty one is sort of kind of equal to ten thousand.
It's not exactly ten thousand but this number is pretty close to ten thousand.
Now this number is pretty close to 1000.
It's certainly closer to 1000 than it is ten thousand.
And this number zero point zero three four is kind of close enough to zero point zero one.
So we call these orders of magnitude and the way to convert a number into an order of magnitude is to
think about what is the closest power of ten to that number.
So for example tend to the power of minus two is zero point zero one tend to the zero is one tend to
the three is one thousand.
And essentially what you're doing with this number in the exponent is using it to shift the decimal
point to the left.
If it's a negative number or to the right if it's a positive number so tend to the zero means that the
decimal point is just after the 1 10 to the minus 1 means you take the decimal point that used to be
here and you move it over one position to the left and here it's over 2 to the left and so on.
So therefore you can say that the number ten thousand and twenty one is for orders of magnitude and
you say that this is for orders of magnitude because ten thousand and twenty one is pretty close to
the number ten thousand and ten thousand is the same thing as tend to the four so four orders of magnitude.
This would be minus one order of magnitude and so on.
OK so that's about orders of magnitude and approximations.
How does scientific notation come into this.
Well scientific notation is basically just a shorthand for writing out all of this.
So instead of writing this out in words you just write it out in numbers so we can say that this number
ten thousand twenty one is approximately or it's the order of magnitude 1 times ten to the power of
four.
And here you would say that two thousand one hundred and nineteen is two times tend to the three.
I should say is approximately equal to it's the same order of magnitude as tend to the three and then
to get a little bit more precise you can say that it's two times tend to the three and if you want to
get even more precise you could say that this is two point one times tend to the three and then here
for a number that's less than 1 then you could say that this number is that in scientific notation This
is three times tend to the minus two.
All right.
So this is how you would write out scientific notation like in a math textbook or if you're writing
this out on a chalkboard or on a piece of paper in computers it looks slightly differently and they
write E plus or minus and then the number in the exponent.
So this is the math notation and this would be the computer notation.
So this is what you see in Python.
So I hope that now it's clear when you see this number in Python and I said that it's a tiny tiny number
it's basically zero plus computer rounding error.
Then you saw that that was like some number times e minus 16.
So that means that there is a decimal point and then 16 zeros and then you get some numbers.
Those are tiny numbers.
All right.
So now let's switch to Python and I'm going to introduce you to some alternate ways of printing with
special formatting that I haven't yet shown you in this course.
OK.
So let's start with some number.
And I just want this to be a big number.
Let's say just like that.
OK.
Now what I'm going to write is going to look a little bit strange at first but this is the way to get
this number to print out in scientific notation in Python.
So what I'm going to do is print in curly brackets.
Colon comma e surrounded by a single close.
And then dot format and then into the format function goes this variable X and let's see what that looks
like this prints out the first number and then a decimal point and then a couple of other numbers six
other numbers times.
Well you don't see the times here explicitly but times E..
Plus nine.
So that means that this number here is three point nine times 10 to the nine.
And that should make sense because if we think about the decimal point being here then we can shift
the decimal point over one two three four five six seven eight nine so then that gives us three point
nine times ten to the power of nine.
Okay.
So let me get rid of this because that's not proper code there.
So this e here is for scientific notation.
There's also other ways that you can use this general approach to formatting in Python.
So for example you can try this with D and that's going to print out this number with commas.
And for most humans it's a bit easier to read with commas than it is to read without the commas OK.
So this is one way to print out in scientific notation there is another way which is actually a bit
similar to this percent s substitution that I've taught you before.
So I have previously taught you to do something like this.
Percent yes.
And then you say percent x.
So that's just printing out the number here replacing this with a string.
Now we can do something slightly different I can say e instead of S and that's going to print this out
in scientific notation just like what you saw here and now I'm going to do something that I haven't
yet introduced you to.
I'm going to write point two.
So decimal point and then to before the E.
And what that is going to do is specify that this number should print out with two numbers after the
decimal point so two degrees of precision after the decimal point.
And if I would put four here then you guessed it we are going to get four numbers after the decimal
point.
All right.
And now I would like to show you one more thing and that's it.
You can set this expression here to be a variable so I can say X equals this thing.
And now if I print s well that just giving back this but if I print these type of s then we see that
S is a string.
So that's pretty interesting because it means that we can index and slice however you like.
So for example the first element or the 0 with index into S is going to be three and actually let me
just make sure that this is clear.
So here is all of us.
And this is the index zero of S and we can also do something like let's say we wanted to get the last
two numbers here.
We could do that by writing minus to remember from indexing and slicing that minus to the minus 2 with
index gives you the second to last index and then we.
So that will give us zero and then if you want to go from there to the end you can write minus two colon
and that will get you from the second to last element all the way up until the end.
So that's pretty convenient because now we've just discovered a way to figure out the number corresponding
to the order of magnitude and that is the great segway into the exercise for this video.
So what you want to do in this exercise is print the nearest order of magnitude for a given number.
So in other words you want to type in some number let's say in this case I picked two thousand three
hundred and forty two.
But of course this procedure should work for any number positive number or a negative number a number
with a decimal point in it.
And then you want to print out something that reads like this.
So the number two thousand three hundred forty two is three orders of magnitude comma approximately.
So this wiggly equals sign here means approximately two times tend to the three.
Now obviously these numbers here and this number here is going to have to be correct for any number
that you put in.
So your goal is to write code that will basically get this message to print out and be accurate for
any number you put in here.
Now solving this exercise involves using a couple of functions and methods in Python that I have not
yet introduced you to in this course.
So if you would like to try to figure this out on your own then now is the time to pause the video switch
to Python and work through it.
I am about to give you a couple of hints the hint is use the following functions.
So log 10 that's a num pi function.
Now of course I've already introduced this function but this is pretty useful for solving this exercise.
And then there is the Linux tag approx so slash slash approx.
Which you might consider trying.
And then there is a method on a string called Dot find and then inside the parentheses you would put
in single quotes a letter that you are trying to find.
So I'm not going to tell you exactly how this method works.
All right.
So now I will switch to Python and you can see my solution now for my solution we need num pie so important
umpires NDP and for printing out late.
I'm going to import from I Python that display.
Import the display and math functions.
Okay so first let's start off with the number.
I'll say I'll use the example I showed in the slides.
I was 2 3 4 2.
All right.
So the first thing I'm going to do is get the order of order of magnitude.
So I'll call that variable order of magnitude.
It's pretty handy to give your variables meaningful names.
And let me walk you through this piecemeal and each time I set another piece of this I'm going to print
this out so you can see what I'm doing.
So we start just with the number.
And then what I'm going to do is take the log base ten of this number.
So this already tells me the order of magnitude here.
Now three might seem confusing because how does three relate to two thousand.
But in fact what this is telling me is that the number two thousand three hundred forty two is the same
thing as ten to the power of this number.
Okay.
So there's a little bit of computer rounding error in here but for order of magnitude in scientific
notation that's good enough.
All right.
But we have a problem and that is if this number were actually a negative number then all the sudden
this wouldn't work anymore.
So what we have to do is take the absolute value of this number and then it's always going to work regardless
of whether this number is positive or negative.
And it's also going to work for a number that's less than 1.
So now we see that this number is minus two orders of magnitude.
Okay.
But actually this is minus one point six.
And we need to call this minus two.
So in fact what we want to do is round but we don't want to just round it.
We want to make sure that we're always rounding down and rounding down means taking the floor.
So now this number turns into minus two and that is actually the right answer.
This is minus two orders of magnitude.
This is plus three orders of magnitude.
Okay.
And then four later.
So this isn't so apparent now but for displaying this number later it's convenient to have this variable
order of mag as an integer not as a float.
And that's mainly because when we're printing out this final statement we want this to say three orders
of magnitude and not three point zero orders of magnitude.
All right.
So that is the order of magnitude.
The next thing we need to do is solve for scientific notation.
So how do we get the scientific notation.
Well let me start by converting this number into Python's version of scientific notation.
So that was colon comma e dot format and then NUM and I'm also gonna start printing out this stuff so
print no string.
Okay.
So the idea here is that we need to convert this string into a message that says two times ten to the
power of three.
Now fortunately this three is exactly the same as this order of magnitude.
So that means really what we want is to get this first number here.
Now on the one hand you could do that with just indexing the first number like this.
But let's see if that's always going to work.
So how about if I do minus two thousand three hundred forty three.
Now the first number is actually minded or the first character I should say is minus.
So this is not going to give you the correct answer.
So what we want to do instead is basically figure out what are all the numbers before the decimal point.
That's the right way to solve this problem.
So how do we find all of the numbers before the decimal point.
That's what I'm going to use this dot find method force.
I'm going to say where dot equals num string dot find and now what I want to find is the period.
OK.
So now I'm going to show you what where dot is.
So where dot is two and actually let me also print out no strings so this is clear.
OK.
So we use this find method with an input of a decimal point.
And essentially what this is returning is the index into our indices into this variable.
This variable that match this string.
So the fact that this is two means that it's the third element in num string where the dot is.
So this zero with element the first element and the second element.
OK.
So now our scientific notation the number before the 10 is going to be num string and then from the
beginning up and to where dots.
And now let me print out this side note.
OK.
So now what we're gonna do is a minus.
So this number is minus two times ten to the power of three.
All right.
So actually this is all of the Python coding that we need to do.
And now what we need to do is some display and latex coding so display math.
So we say the number is and I'm using the text tag here because I want to write this out as is
some more text text and then this is going to be orders of magnitude.
And actually before getting too much further let's make sure that this is correct so far.
So the first substitution is going to be the number the next substitution is going to be the order of
magnitude.
Order of magnitude.
And that's it for now.
Okay.
So let's see.
All right.
So here we say minus two thousand three hundred forty two is three orders of magnitude so far.
That's correct.
Let's see if this also works for about 42.
That's a particularly good number.
That's one order of magnitude.
How about four point two.
That is zero orders of magnitude.
How about zero point zero point zero for two That's minus two orders of magnitude.
All right.
So so far this seems to be working.
Now I went to write that this is also approximately equal to so that's where I use this later code approx.
So approximately equal to some number times 10 to the power of some other number.
Okay so now we need.
Let's see.
So we had num an order of magnitude that was here in here and then is orders of magnitude approximately.
Then this is gonna be the side note variable here for scientific notation and then we have 10 to the
power of order of mag.
Okay.
So this is starting to get to be a bit of a long line of code.
I'm going to put a slash here and continue this on the next line.
So let's see how this looks.
All right.
So point 0 4 2 is minus 2 orders of magnitude which is approximately four times 10 to the minus 2.
And again it's worth trying a couple of different numbers here.
Let's try.
How about this number.
All right.
So this is eight orders of magnitude.
It's about nine times send to the eight.
What if we make this negative and put a decimal point there and then we see it's minus nine times tend
to the three and now this shows a pretty interesting discussion.
So is nine thousand let me actually just make this a little bit simpler here for the sake of discussion.
So an action I'm going to make this even more extreme.
So nine thousand nine hundred and ninety nine.
Now you would probably think that nine thousand nine hundred ninety nine is closer to ten thousand than
it is to 1000.
But here with our code we came up with the solution and the answer that this is actually three orders
of magnitude or approximately nine times tend to the power of three.
Now this is actually not incorrect although it does seem a little bit strange.
They are in fact two different ways of computing the order of magnitude.
One is to round the number first to the nearest order of magnitude in which case this would get rounded
up to ten thousand.
And another method is simply to go with the number of digits.
So depending on the application depending on the goal these two different methods can be correct in
different contexts.
Nonetheless I think you now have a pretty good grasp of orders of magnitude and scientific notation
and how to print and decode scientific notation in Python.